---
title: "Discussion"
order: 5
---
In the present study we demonstrated that BOLD responses to surprising tactile stimuli are produced by a pattern of increased forward-driving effective connectivity within a caudal-to- rostral ascending hierarchy of somatosensory, limbic, and prefrontal areas. Most relevant to embodied predictive coding, we found that within this overall feed-forward flow of causal influences, insula responses to deviants were driven by increases in the strength of both ascending connectivity with prefrontal and cingulate cortex and backwards connectivity with the primary somatosensory area. Importantly, individual differences in the strength of these connectivity modulations predicted participants subjectively rated ease in detecting stimulus changes. This pattern of connections is consistent with the anterior insula acting as core comparator underlying bodily awareness and provides support for core hypothesis of embodied predictive coding.

Previous fMRI studies of oddball responses in the visual, auditory, and tactile modalities report bilateral increases in BOLD activity in the thalamus (TH), primary sensory areas (e.g., S1/V1/A1), anterior insula (AIC), dorso-medial cingulate (MCC), and inferior and middle frontal gyrus (IFG, MFG), all implicated in the present study (See for review: [Downar et al. 2002](http://jn.physiology.org/content/87/1/615); [Garrido et al. 2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029)). Our mass-univariate results are thus highly consistent with a canonical oddball response in the tactile domain, confirming that unexpected touch is processed in the brain by a coordinated hierarchy of both modality-specific areas (posterior thalamus, S1) and a more cross-modal network of regions likely involved in orienting to salient events (AIC, MCC) and coordinating attention and cognitive control (IFG, MFG).
Deviance responses have been extensively studied using electrophysiological measures which capture the well-characterized mismatch negativity scalp component ([Garrido et al. 2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029)). Studies in the tactile domain have previously demonstrated mismatch responses to sudden changes in stimulus location ([Huang et al. 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.05.036)), intensity ([Chen et al. 2008](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.020)), and frequency ([Kekoni et al. 1997](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0301-0511\(97\)05249-6)). One previous study using the RSOT modelled the tactile mismatch negativity as encoding Bayesian surprise, a computational marker of prediction error. Interestingly that study found that primary and secondary somatosensory cortices strongly encoded an early (140ms) stimulus-locked rise in Bayesian surprise whereas fronto-insular and cingulate sources showed a later response more associated with the representation of stimulus changes; i.e., salience.

Here we observed strong activation of both S1 and AIC to tactile oddballs, which was mediated by a robust modulation of thalamic afferents to both areas. Both areas were in turn found to directly influence cingulate and prefrontal cortex. A plausible interpretation of both Ostwald’s and our own results is that the AIC and MCC jointly monitor the precision or inverse-variance of S1 responses encoding automatic perceptual learning. Precision has been linked computationally to perceptual salience and attention and more specifically to contextual learning via neuromodulatory regulation of post-synaptic cortical gain ([Moran et al. 2013](https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.4255-12.2013)). Indeed, the AIC and MCC have been shown to encode to expected precision or volatility ([Iglesias et al. 2013](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.009); [Schwartenbeck et al. 2014](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu159)) and are generally thought to form part of the ‘salience network’, facilitating rapid orienting responses to important stimuli. Under predictive coding, salience (i.e. the selection of behaviourally relevant stimuli) can be operationalized as the precision-weighting of prediction errors by post-synaptic modulatory gain ([Feldman and Friston 2010](http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215); [Friston et al. 2012](http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00151)). Consistent with the interpretation that the anterior insula monitors and regulates precision, we found that deviancy signals bypassed S1 to directly modulate the AIC via thalamic afferents, in addition to an indirect route via S1. Thalamic cells are capable of firing in both tonic and ‘burst’ modes with the latter being important for the processing of salient events ([Sherman 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0079-6123\(05\)49009-3)). Our finding that deviancy directly modulated the AIC, which in turn regulated down-stream S1 responses suggests that the region may monitor the precision of thalamic inputs directly in order to enable fast awareness and responding to critical events (e.g. pain, unexpected touch). This recurrent insular-thalamic-somatosensory loop may be crucial for conscious awareness of tactile changes.

Indeed, recurrent neural activity in the somatosensory hierarchy has previously been shown to be important for conscious somatosensory awareness ([Auksztulewicz et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.3974-11.2012)); in general such cortical-subcortical loops are thought to be critical for conscious awareness (Dehaene et al. 2014). Here we found that strong recurrent connectivity between the AIC and somatosensory cortex supports the processing of tactile oddballs, and that individual differences in the strength of backwards influences from the PFC to AIC predicted the self-rated ease of detecting subtle stimulus changes. These findings together suggest that the AIC coordinates the global cortical processing of surprising bodily stimuli by linking lower-level sensory regions to more attention and salience-related areas in the prefrontal and cingulate cortex during the processing of unexpected tactile changes. As discussed above, an interesting possible interpretation is that the AIC supports the emergence of a global workspace by directly monitoring and modulating the precision of these top-down and bottom-up inputs ([Friston and Kiebel 2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0300); [Bastos et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038)). Future studies will benefit from directly manipulating tactile precision and deviancy in conjunction with computational modelling to address this question.

Finally, we observed a significant relationship between backwards connection strengths and difficulty ratings, wherein participants whose AIC was most strongly influenced by the PFC also reported the easiest time detecting stimulus changes. As predictive coding postulates that model updates or predictions should be most specifically encoded by top-down connections, this result links top-down effective connectivity or inference to awareness as hypothesized ([Bastos et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038)). This result thus establishes an essential link between top-down inference, the anterior insula, and embodied awareness, providing criterion validity for our dynamic causal modelling results (Pennington 2003). It is also worth noting that in participants reporting the lowest difficulty discriminating stimulus changes, the presence of strong DLPFC to AIC connectivity effectively completed a cortical-subcortical recurrent loop between somatosensory and prefrontal cortex (compare [Figure 4](#figure-4) and [5](#figure-5)), in line with a role for the AIC in coordinating a global workspace ([Dehaene et al. 2014](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2013.12.005)). However, given that participants merely provided offline ratings which can be subject to a variety of biases, an alternative interpretation may be that participants rated factors unrelated to level of sensory awareness, such as general cognitive effort. We find this interpretation unlikely however; although one previous study did find that DLPFC activations to oddball stimuli are eliminated during a passive oddball task ([Clark et al. 2001](https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.1046)), the counting task helps to ensure that participants dedicate equivalent attentional effort to deviants and standards, as switches are inherently unpredictable ([Garrido et al. 2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029)). Furthermore, overall switch counts were extremely accurate (mean accuracy = 99%) and participants did not rate either condition as significantly more difficult to detect. These observations make it unlikely that the result is purely confounded by attentional effort, and likely relates to the subjective awareness of intensity differences. Indeed, even with a high level of detection performance and equivalent difficulty ratings across conditions, we observed considerable variability in self-rated difficulty to detect stimulus changes, suggesting that some participants experienced switches more vividly than others. However, to better elucidate the role of attentional control or metacognitive report bias ([Fleming and Lau 2014](http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00443)) in this result, it remains an important step for future research to manipulating stimulus probability in the context of a tactile detection task with intensity and perhaps confidence ratings on every trial. Future investigations will help to dissociate the role of executive function and metacognitive awareness in the response to embodied prediction error.
