---
title: "Methods"
order: 3
---

### Participants

Thirty-eight healthy participants (16 males) were recruited from Aarhus University and the surrounding community. Inclusion criteria specified that all participants were between the ages of 21-45 years, right handed, free from medications with contraindications for the BOLD signal (psychiatric, blood pressure or heart medication, etc.), physically and mentally healthy, and meeting standard MRI safety inclusion criteria (lack of claustrophobia, metallic implants, etc.). All participants gave verbal consent and visited the MRI laboratory at Aarhus University Hospital for approximately 2 hours in total, and received a 300 DKK (approx. €40) participation reimbursement. All experimental procedures were conducted with approval from the local ethics committee (De Videnskabsetiske Komitéer for Region Midtjylland) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 8 participants in total were excluded from preliminary data analysis - one for excessive motion during scanning, 6 for extremely poor behavioral performance (see Roving Somatosensory Oddball Task for further details), and one for failure to acquire pulse regressors. The final sample for the fMRI analysis included 30 participants (14 males) with a mean age of
24.5 years (SD = 3.2).

### Roving Somatosensory Oddball Task

To manipulate tactile probability while controlling for stimulus intensity and attention, we utilized a Roving Somatosensory Oddball Task (RSOT) in which trains of stimuli randomly switch between high and low intensity after a variable number of repetitions ([Garrido et al. 2008](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.018); [Ostwald et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.050)). In the present study, stimuli were delivered in trains of 3-7 repetitions. Stimuli consisted of single electrical pulses of 50 μs duration and 2000 ms interstimulus interval. Following each repetitive train, stimuli switched between low or high intensity trials, where low intensity trials corresponded to a single pulse at twice the perceptual threshold, and high intensity trials consisted of two pulses identical to the single delivered in rapid succession (100 ms inter- stimulus interval). This paradigm has been repeatedly shown to elicit sensory prediction errors ([Garrido et al. 2008](The functional anatomy of the MMN: A DCM study of the roving paradigm](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.01), [2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029); [Lieder et al. 2013](https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003288)), with deviant trials selectively increasing the strength of forward-driving neural connectivity (Dietz et al. 2014) and eliciting Bayesian surprise in somatosensory and cingulate cortices ([Ostwald et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.050)).

This stimulation protocol resulted in a sensation of a mild tickle or vibration that was not reported as painful by any participant. The first stimulus of each new train was modelled as the “deviant”, and the third repetition following the deviant as the “standard”. The number of repetitions between each switch was randomly sampled from a normal distribution over possible repetition numbers (i.e., between 3 and 7), generating an unpredictable uniform stimulus sequence. Participants received a total of 158 deviant and 640 repetition stimuli (of which 158 stimuli were selected as standard). All stimuli were delivered to the median nerve of the left forearm using two MR-safe ECG electrodes placed approximately 2.5 cm apart and a constant current stimulator (DeMeTec, Langgoens, Germany). See [Figure 1](#figure-1) for an overview of the experimental set-up and sample stimulus train.

After placement in the scanner, participants’ individual perceptual thresholds were determined using an adaptive staircase procedure prior to scanning. The staircase consisted of a one-up/three-down procedure, where step size was reduced every two reversals until reaching a total of 8 reversals. The sensory threshold was thus calculated by averaging the stimulus intensities corresponding to the 8 reversals. Stimuli for the subsequent oddball task were then delivered at twice this sensory threshold, eliciting a mild touch sensation. After thresholding, participants completed a short practice version of the oddball task, and continued to the main experiment after indicating that the task instructions were fully understood. All participants completed approximately 30 minutes of the RSOT during fMRI acquisition.

Pilot investigation with this stimulation protocol revealed that as intended, the double stimulation was perceived as slightly more intense than single trials. To control attention, participants were instructed to silently count all stimuli switches throughout the entire task duration, in a standard ‘active’ counting task ([Garrido et al. 2009](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029)). This manipulation ensures that participants must exert equivalent attentional effort to both deviant and standard trials, as the occurrence of deviants is unpredictable. Participant switch counts were then recorded at the end of the imaging session to ensure compliance. Six participants reporting switch counts 60% above or below the true total (i.e., poorer than chance performance) were excluded from data analyses. Overall switch count accuracy of the remaining participants was extremely high (mean accuracy 99%), suggesting successful attentional control and task participation.

Following the scan, participants completed a debriefing inquiring about the nature of the felt stimuli (e.g., painful or non-painful). Participants also rated the felt intensity of each stimulus type (i.e., low and high), and the difficulty detecting stimulus changes from low to high and from high to low, on visual analog scales with 0 marked as ‘not at all intense/difficult’ and 100 labeled as ‘very difficult/intense’. The adaptive staircase procedure, the RSOT and the post-scan ratings were implemented in [Psychopy](http://www.psychopy.org/) (v1.76.00) ([Peirce 2007](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2006.11.017)).

### Data acquisition and preprocessing

All brain measurements were acquired on a Siemens Trio 3T scanner, using a 32-channel head coil. For fMRI, 31 slices were acquired in ascending order using a gradient echo planar sequence with echo time 30 ms, voxel size 3 × 3 × 3 mm in a 64 × 64 mm field of view, repetition time = 1.54 s. Slices were manually positioned to ensure full coverage of somatosensory cortex, anterior insula, prefrontal cortex, and thalamus, flip angle = 90°. A T1-weighted MPRAGE structural image was collected after the EPI sequence. B0 field maps were collected using a gradient echo field map sequence. To control for physiological BOLD-signal confounds, cardiac cycles were recorded in synchrony with EPI acquisition using an infrared pulse oximeter on the participant’s right index finger.

### fMRI Analysis

MRI data were analysed using [Statistical Parametric Mapping](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) (SPM8 for GLM analysis and SPM12b for DCM). Each participant’s 1,109 EPI images were corrected for geometric distortions caused by susceptibility-induced field inhomogeneities. This was done using a combined correction for both static distortions and changes in those distortions caused by head motion ([Andersson et al. 2001](https://dx.doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0746); [Hutton et al. 2002](https://dx.doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1054)). Static distortions were calculated using the FieldMap toolbox to process each participant’s B0 field map ([Hutton et al. 2004](http://cds.ismrm.org/ismrm-2004/Files/001084.pdf)). EPI images were then realigned, unwarped, and co-registered to the participant’s anatomical scan. The anatomical images were processed using the unified segmentation procedure implementing tissue segmentation, bias correction, and spatial normalization ([Ashburner and Friston 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.02.018)); derived normalization parameters were then applied to the EPI images. Finally, the images were smoothed using a 6 mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian kernel, and resampled to 3 × 3 × 3 mm voxels.

To control for motion and physiological BOLD signal confounds, serial correlations were modelled using a nuisance variable regression approach thoroughly described in (Lund et al., 2006). In addition to the SPM8 standard discrete cosine set high pass filter (128 s cut off), this approach included 10 RETROICOR-derived regressors based on cardiac oscillations ([Glover et al., 2000](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1522-2594(200007)44:1<162::AID-MRM23>3.0.CO;2-E)). We also included the full 12 parameter Volterra expansion of motion and motion history parameters to capture rigid body head movement related to subject motion and respiration (Friston et al., 1996).

To examine BOLD responses to somatosensory oddballs, we modelled the EPI data in a fixed-effects general linear model (GLM) for individual participant BOLD timeseries. To do so we modelled Deviants (the first trial of a new stimulus intensity) and Standards (the third repetition following each Deviant) as separate event-related regressors convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function. The remaining repetition trials were treated as implicit baseline. Mass-univariate statistical analysis was conducted using a hierarchical t- contrasts; fixed effects within each participant were assessed using a Deviant > Standard unidirectional t-contrast. The resulting contrast images were then passed to a random-effects one sample t-test over all participants, contrasting for positive mean response. The resulting SPM was peak-corrected for multiple comparisons at a family-wise error rate P<sub>FWE</sub> < 0.05 using Gaussian random field theory ([Nichols and Hayasaka 2003](https://dx.doi.org/10.1191/0962280203sm341ra)).

### Dynamic Causal Modelling

For our analysis of effective connectivity, we were interested in the overall impact of surprising tactile changes on effective connectivity within the right lateralized network identified by our mass-univariate analysis. Our connectivity hypotheses primarily concerned the pattern of modulations within a relatively large network of sub-cortical, cortical, and prefrontal areas rather than the intrinsic network architecture (e.g. the presence or absence of connections). To accommodate this, we utilized a recently developed data-driven approach to model selection that is optimised for large scale parameter estimates ([Friston and Penny 2011](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.062); [Friston et al. 2011](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.039)). This allowed us to search within a "full" model, which contained all free and intrinsic parameters, for the best of all its possible sub-models. Within this best model, we applied classical parametric tests to the strength of specific connections. This approach is based on the high a priori plausibility of reciprocal mono- and polysynaptic connections (both of which are captured by directed connections in DCM for fMRI) existing between the majority of cortical and sub-cortical centres ([Friston et al. 2011](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.039); [Bastos et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038); [Markov et al. 2013](https://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1238406)) and thus prioritizes inferences over parameter strengths. We were thus able to make robust inferences about the strength and directionality of connections within an inclusive model space while circumventing limitations regarding the combinatorial explosion of models in classical DCM approaches ([Lohmann et al. 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.025)).

To do so, we first remodelled our design to include the deviance condition as a parametric connectivity modulator, recoding all trials into a single regressor parametrically modulated by the Deviant > Standard (D>S) contrast (Stephan et al., 2010). We then extracted BOLD time series for the main effect of D>S from each volume of interest (VOI), for use during the specification of our DCMs. This extraction was based on peak activations in the Deviant > Standard group contrast, with VOIs in the dorsal-posterior thalamus (TH) [MNI<sub>xyz</sub> = 12, -16, 10], somatosensory area 2 [MNI<sub>xyz</sub> = 48, -34, 49] (S1), anterior insula cortex (AIC) [MNI<sub>xyz</sub> = 36, 20, 1], anterior mid- cingulate cortex (MCC) [MNI<sub>xyz</sub> = 3, 23, 43], and middle frontal gyrus (MFG) [MNI<sub>xyz</sub> = 36, 50, 22]. All anatomical labels at extracted coordinates were confirmed using the SPM Probabilistic Anatomy Toolbox ([Eickhoff et al. 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.034)).

VOI time series were then extracted from the D > S contrast in each participant via an automated search procedure. To do so, time series were summarized as the principle eigenvariate extracted from within a 6mm spherical VOI centred on each participant’s local maxima. The position of each local maximum was determined by searching within a 12 mm radius search sphere (i.e., twice our 6mm FWHM smoothing kernel), centred on the group coordinate for that region. Extracted peak coordinates were plotted on a standard brain and visually inspected to ensure all extracted time series were from the appropriate anatomical region of interest. For extraction, participant-level SPMs were thresholded at p < 0.05 uncorrected, voxel extent threshold k > 5 contiguous voxels. All time-series were corrected for the effects-of-interest F-contrast. Given that we stimulated the left median nerve and were primarily interested in the right- lateralized body-awareness network ([Craig 2003](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0959-4388(03)00090-4)), all VOIs were extracted from the right side of the brain. In five participants, regional VOIs from one or more regions could not be obtained, leaving 25 total participants for all DCM analyses.

We chose a somewhat conservative approach to modelling the oddball effect by using the difference between deviants and standards as both a driving and modulatory input. This reflects the fact that, from the point of view of fMRI, the repeated presentation of stimuli every two seconds (as in our design) is effectively a steady state stimulus. Therefore, the only events inducing a haemodynamic response are the occasional deviants (relative to an arbitrary standard). We thus allowed for the deviant input to exert driving and modulatory effects. In other words, we allowed for a direct exogenous effect of deviants (mediated by unknown sources) and an effect mediated by a change in the sensitivity to extrinsic and intrinsic afferents from modelled sources (see [Figure 3C](#figure-3) for illustration of the full model). The full model thus included the impact of deviants as a driving input to the thalamus, and modulatory deviance effects on all intrinsic and self-connections. The full model with extrinsic (fixed) connections between all nodes and deviance vs standard modulations (free parameters) for all connections was then estimated in each participant using the variational Bayesian expectation maximization algorithm implemented in SPM12.

For model selection, we applied the post-hoc Bayesian model optimization procedure for network discovery ([Friston et al. 2011](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.039)). This technique estimates the evidence for all possible models by inverting the full model and applying a greedy search algorithm to find the probability of particular connections existing and whether a connection is modulated by an experimental condition ([Friston and Penny 2011](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.062)). The post-hoc model optimization routine thus furnished posterior model probabilities (i.e., the probability that a model is the best explanation for the data) for all reduced models, including a null-model with no connections. The strength of evidence for the winning model was determined using the Bayes factor; i.e., the ratio of evidence for the best model vs. the second best model ([Penny et al. 2004](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.03.026)). The parameter estimates from the winning model for each participant were then subjected to conventional frequentist analyses to determine relative modulatory strengths for various connections and contrasts of connections. These tests were false discovery rate corrected at <i>P<sub>FDR</sub></i> < 0.05 for multiple comparisons.

We tested two connectivity hypotheses; first, we established the principal directionality of deviant-driven connectivity modulations in terms of the strength with which deviant vs. standard trials modulated each of the 25 intrinsic and self-connections. This was accomplished using one- sample t-tests over the 25 estimated modulatory (B-matrix) parameters, <i>P<sub>FDR</sub></i> < 0.05. This approach enabled us to establish both the overall pattern of deviance-evoked changes in on effective connectivity within the somatosensory-oddball network, and to specifically evaluate the directionality of modulations to and from the AIC. Second, we assessed the relationship between individual differences in participants’ perceived difficulty detecting sensory changes (i.e., the averaged post-scan difficulty ratings) and deviance-driven modulation of each intrinsic connection (i.e., the 20 between-region B-matrix parameters). To do so, we conducted robust regression analyses using Tukey’s Biweight. This method was chosen over a least squares approach to protect against outlier values, which are a frequent issue in neuroimaging individual differences analyses ([Poldrack 2012](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.007)). Regression p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons to a <i>P<sub>FDR</sub></i> < 0.05. All ANOVA and one-sample t-test analyses were conducted in SPSS version 20 (IBM), and all FDR thresholds and robust regression analysis were calculated using MATLAB R2012b (Mathworks, Inc) and the FDR toolbox.
