---
title: "Results"
order: 4
---
### Sample Characteristics and Nuisance Regression

Minus the 6 participants excluded for extremely poor performance, the average number of counted deviants was 156 (SD = 17) out of 158 total, corresponding to an average count accuracy of 99%. This result indicates that the majority of participants were able to fully comply with the task instructions, precluding major differences in attentional effort between standard and deviant trials. In the post scan debriefing, all participants reported that the stimuli were perceived as a non-painful mild touch sensation. The average sensory threshold across participants was 12.22 mA (SD = 2.86). As a manipulation check, we compared participant’s intensity and difficulty ratings for low vs. high stimuli via paired-sample t-tests. Double stimuli (mean intensity rating = 57, SD = 21) were rated as significantly more intense than single stimuli (mean intensity rating = 46, SD = 16, mean difference = 11, SD = 19, t29 = 3.4, p = 0.002), validating our stimulus manipulation. As no significant difference was found for the self-rated difficulty of discriminating single-to-double (mean difficulty rating = 34, SD = 26) or double-to-single trials (mean difficulty rating = 36, SD = 23, mean difference = -1.5, SD =17.5, t29 = -0.5, p = .64), we averaged the two difficulty ratings from each participant to derive an index of change awareness. This index was then used as an independent variable in our regression analysis with DCM modulatory parameters.

### Mass-univariate results

As expected, our fMRI GLM analysis of the Deviant > Standard contrast revealed extensive bilateral activations in primary somatosensory and parietal cortex. Within the right hemisphere, somatosensory activations covered 27.8% of area 2 and extended into areas of the intra-parietal cortex. The largest proportion of this activation was within area 2 (7.8% of cluster) followed by the IPC (6.1%). Consistent with previous oddball fMRI studies we additionally observed significant bilateral activations in the dorsal mid-cingulate, anterior insula, and middle frontal gyrus extending into dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 45). In the midbrain, we observed bilateral activations in dorsal-posterior thalamus (identified as thalamus-prefrontal using the SPM anatomy toolbox), and caudate nucleus. All anatomical labels and percent activations were determined using the SPM probabilistic anatomy toolbox. See [Table 1](#table-1) and [Figure 2](#figure-2) for a complete overview of these results.

### DCM Results

Post-hoc model optimization found that the full model (M255, shown in [Figure 4B](#figure-4)), with all intrinsic connections and modulations, had the highest posterior probability (pP = 0.79). The next most probable model was M128 with a posterior probability of 0.06; the Bayes factor discriminating these two models (pP<sub>M255</sub>/pP<sub>M128</sub>) was 13.17, corresponding to positive evidence for model 255 being the best explanation for the data ([Penny et al. 2004](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.03.026)). See [Figure 3](#figure-3) for an overview of the model selection results and plots illustrating fixed and modulatory connectivity strengths for the winning model.

One sample t-tests over all 25 modulatory parameters revealed a general pattern of increased modulation by somatosensory deviants in a forward driving caudal to rostral hierarchy, with significant increases in connections from TH to AIC and S1, from S1 to AIC, MCC, and MFG, from AIC to MCC and MFG, and from MCC to MFG ([Figure 4](#figure-4)). In line with the hypothesis that AIC acts as a body-state comparator, the AIC increased both backwards connectivity towards S1 and forwards connectivity to the MCC and MFG. The AIC and S1 were the only regions to show increases in reciprocal connectivity. Additionally, significant modulations of the TH, AIC, and S1 self-connections were found, suggesting that somatosensory oddballs induce strong dis- inhibition of these regions. Finally, our robust regression analyses found three modulatory effects significantly predicting subjective difficulty ratings ([Figure 5B](#figure-5)), all on backwards connections (MFG to TH, MFG to MCC, and MFG to AIC). Only the MFG to AIC relationship survived FDR correction, with the Deviant > Standard modulation predicting 38% of the variance in subjective difficulty; <i>t</i>(1, 25) = -3.47, <i>P<sub>FDR</sub></i> = 0.0015, R<sup>2</sup> = 38.04 ([Figure 5A](#figure-5)).
